# Import

This document describes the import process.

The import algorithm is based on the following premises:
* that subsequent imports will always be of the same mex-model versions or a higher version
* that an initial import has already been run and the `processed` folder accordingly populated

Import data is processed in the following directory structure, the first two levels are created
should the not exist at runtime:

```
s3_downloads/
├── downloaded/
│   ├── [model version]/
│   │   └── [timestamp]/
│   │       ├── items.ndjson
│   │       └── metadata.json
│   └── tmp/
│       └── draft-[timestamp]/
│           └── metadata.json
├── processed/
│   └── [model version]/
│       └── [timestamp]/
│           ├── items.ndjson
│           └── metadata.json
├── diffs/
│   └── [timestamp]/
│       ├── diff.ndjson
│       └── metadata.json
├── history/
│   └── [timestamp]/
│       ├── diff.ndjson
│       └── metadata.json
└── logs/
    └── [name]-[date].log
```

Whole dumps are kept in separated model version subfolders. Diff files are not, however, the mex-
model version is kept in the accompanying `metadata.json` file.

Config is kept in an environment file, `.env`. It expects the following variables:
  - `MEX_IMPORT_BUCKET`: the name of the S3 bucket
  - `MEX_IMPORT_AWS_KEY_ID`: your AWS access key ID
  - `MEX_IMPORT_AWS_SECRET`: your AWS secret access key
  - `MEX_IMPORT_REGION_NAME`: the AWS region where your bucket is located, optional and defaults to `eu-central-1`
  - `MEX_IMPORT_ENDPOINT_URL`: optional, if you are using a custom S3 endpoint
  - `MEX_IMPORT_EMAIL`: the email of the Invenio user will own the records imported

The script `site/mex_invenio/scripts/file_resolver.py` scans the S3 bucket for all available
`metadata.json` files and downloads them to a temporary subfolder. These metadata files have the following
structure:

```json
{
    "sha256_checksum": "134f3bc1fb5ec2cda312ba4352f3765a2719af84d8c264393b755f250f1a5016",
    "versions": {
        "mex-backend": "1.8.0",
        "mex-common": "1.19.0",
        "mex-extractors": "1.14.0",
        "mex-model": "4.10.2"
    },
    "write_completed_at": "2026-04-30T22:00:25.289305+00:00"
}
```

The script will extract the model version and simplify to `major version.minor version` (omit the patch
version), in this case 4.10. This model version is used to look up the most recent folder in the
`processed/[model version]` directory and does a comparison of the checksum and timestamp therein (for example:
`processed/4.10/20260501134204/metadata.json`), if the checksums don't match and the timestamp
in the newly downloaded dump is older, then the newly downloaded dump is moved from the `downloaded/tmp/` folder to
the `downloaded/[model version]` directory.

Having established that there is a new dump, a diff file is generated. The reason a diff file is generated is to
minimize the load on the Invenio API. The premise of the diff is that the order of content remains consistent and
that items and records aren't deleted. Thus, the diff file is generated by iterating through the most recently
processed dump and the oldest downloaded dump and creating a md5 hash of each line/record and comparing.

It is worth noting that the import function in `import_data.py` also does a comparison against the metadata
for each record, based on the record's unique mex:identifier and so importing the same records repeatedly has
no effect.

All pending diff files are imported, starting with the oldest diff file. If successfully imported, the diff file
is moved to the history folder.

The diff metadata file is structured like so:

```json
{
    "model_version": "4.10",
    "processed_file": "s3_downloads/processed/4.10/20260430192021/items.ndjson",
    "downloaded_file": "s3_downloads/downloaded/4.10/20260504230139/items.ndjson",
    "timestamp": "2026-05-05T14:41:57.474220+00:00",
    "new_or_changed_count": 139,
    "processed_count": 175374
}
```

"`downloaded_file`" is the new file which is compared against "`processed_file`".
The "`timestamp`" is for when the diff file is created. "`new_or_changed_count`" is the number
of new or changed lines, or the number of objects in the diff file. "`processed_count`" is the number
of lines total in the "`downloaded_file`".
